Frontiers in Psychology 01 frontiersin.org
Dual-process model of courage
Aakash A.  Chowkase 1*, Fabio Andrés Parra- Martínez 2, 
Mehdi  Ghahremani 3, Zoe  Bernstein 4, Gabrielle  Finora 5 and 
Robert J.  Sternberg 4
1 Department of Psychology, University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, CA, United States, 
2 Department of Education Reform, College of Education and Health Professions, University of 
Arkansas, Fayetteville, AR, United States, 3 Department of Counseling, Higher Education Leadership, 
Educational Psychology, and Foundations, Mississippi State University, Starkville, MS, United States, 
4 Department of Psychology, College of Human Ecology, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, United States, 
5 Division of Nutritional Sciences, College of Human Ecology, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, United 
States
Courage is one of the most significant psychological constructs for society, but 
not one of the most frequently studied. This paper presents a process model of 
courage consisting of decision-based pathways by which one comes to enact 
a courageous action. We  argue the process of courage begins with a trigger 
involving an actor(s) and a situation(s). The actor(s) then engage(s) in four key 
assessments concerning (a) immediacy of the situation, (b) meaningfulness, value, 
and relevance to the actor, (c) adequacy of efficacy to act, and (d) decision to 
act with courage. The central component of this process entails an approach-
avoidance conflict involving assessments of perceived risks and potential noble 
outcomes of acting with courage. The decision to act may result in courageous 
actions assuming it satisfies the four elements: intentionality, objective and 
substantial risk, a noble purpose, and meaning in time and place. Courageous 
actions have consequences. Finally, the consequences shape the actors’ 
experience, which feeds into the trigger, closing the loop. Potential moderators of 
the courage process as well as potential tests of the model have been discussed.
KEYWORDS
courage, dual-system theory, type I thinking, type II thinking, noble purpose, 
approach-avoidance conflict, expectancy-value theory, risk assessment
OPEN ACCESS
EDITED BY
Cristina Torrelles-Nadal,  
University of Lleida, Spain
REVIEWED BY
Mohammad Khodayarifard,  
University of Tehran, Iran
Cynthia Pury,  
Clemson University, United States
*CORRESPONDENCE
Aakash A. Chowkase  
 chowkase@berkeley.edu
RECEIVED 25 January 2024
ACCEPTED 11 March 2024
PUBLISHED 22 March 2024
CITATION
Chowkase AA, Parra-Martínez FA,  
Ghahremani M, Bernstein Z, Finora G and 
Sternberg RJ (2024) Dual-process model of 
courage.
Front. Psychol. 15:1376195.
doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2024.1376195
COPYRIGHT
© 2024 Chowkase, Parra-Martínez, 
Ghahremani, Bernstein, Finora and Sternberg. 
This is an open-access article distributed 
under the terms of the Creative Commons 
Attribution License (CC BY). The use, 
distribution or reproduction in other forums is 
permitted, provided the original author(s) and 
the copyright owner(s) are credited and that 
the original publication in this journal is cited, 
in accordance with accepted academic 
practice. No use, distribution or reproduction 
is permitted which does not comply with 
these terms.
TYPE Hypothesis and Theory
PUBLISHED 22 March 2024
DOI 10.3389/fpsyg.2024.1376195
1 Introduction
“Courage is not the absence of fear, but rather the assessment that something else is more 
important than fear” – Roosevelt (1932).
Courage is often a deliberate assessment of a trigger and an analyzed decision on how to 
proceed toward a noble purpose in the face of personal risks (Rate et al., 2007). Courage is one 
of the most significant psychological constructs for society, but not one of the most frequently 
studied. Sternberg (2022b) has suggested that, for humanity, courage is the most important 
gift of all. For over a year now (March 2024), people in Iran have been protesting against the 
theocratic regime for wider freedoms and women’s rights ( Alkhaldi and Ebrahim, 2022 ; 
Reuters, 2022a). Similarly, despite the rising number of killings of activists in Colombia, 
courageous social leaders resist threats in their quest to defend people’s basic human rights 
after five decades of armed conflict (Prem et al., 2018; Llanes et al., 2022). Another similar case 
is that of the ongoing war between Ukraine and Russia, in which Ukrainian citizens and the 
Ukrainian army are fighting not just for their country’s sovereignty, but also for survival 
(Hook, 2022). On another note, today, many countries, including the United States, are faced 
with threats to their democracies (Albright, 2018; Mounk, 2018; Ziblatt and Levitsky, 2018; 
Chowkase et al. 10.3389/fpsyg.2024.1376195
Frontiers in Psychology 02 frontiersin.org
Applebaum, 2021; Ben-Ghiat, 2021). Without the courage of the 
citizens in these countries, those democracies may well be lost.
Not only is courage important at the level of a country. It also is 
important in one’s daily life. Examples are voicing opinions or standing 
up for oneself or one’s colleagues who might be facing injustice in the 
workplace (Schilpzand et al., 2015).
But what, exactly, is courage? What are the steps leading to 
courageous actions, and what kinds of factors lead people to be more 
or less likely to display courage? In this article, we build on existing 
scholarship on courage and propose a novel dual-process model that 
describes courage as a deliberate, multi-stage process involving 
numerous decision-based pathways by which one comes to enact a 
courageous action–or not.
2 What is courage?
2.1 The courageous actor
Oftentimes, courage is understood in terms of courageous 
people–individuals who are labeled either as courageous or not (Pury 
and Starkey, 2010; Rate, 2010). However, courage is not just a trait, but 
also a virtue, a skill, and an attitude toward a given situation (Comte-
Sponville, 2002; Jacobson, 2005). It can also be  a trait or a state 
(Sternberg, 2022a). Courage is considered to be one of the six core 
virtues contributing to goodness among humans across nations, 
cultures, and religious beliefs (Peterson and Seligman, 2004). It is also 
one of the most universally respected virtues, as it is essential in 
practicing all other virtues (Comte-Sponville, 2002). Understanding 
courage as a virtue implies that people with noble intentions can 
perform courageous acts. Similarly, when courage is understood as a 
skill as well as an attitude, one can learn and practice courage. 
Moreover, one who repeatedly performs courageous behaviors is 
typically perceived as possessing the trait of courage (Rate et al., 2007; 
Pury and Starkey, 2010; Rate, 2010). The Iranian protests’ growth over 
time indicates that courage is a virtue as well as a learned behavior that 
many can practice by transforming their noble intentions into actions.
2.2 The courageous act
Courage is also often understood through its enacted aspect–the 
courageous act. Courage can be manifested in a variety of ways and 
situations, from local and possibly daily instances to large-scale, 
possibly once-in-a-lifetime global actions ( Pury and Lopez, 2010 ; 
Koerner, 2014). Perhaps the prototypical instance of courage would 
be resisting the abuse of power. One can see this resistance in daily life 
as well as on a larger scale. On a local level, defiance of abuse of power 
can be  exemplified by an individual confronting a bully at the 
workplace (workplace courage; Sekerka and Bagozzi, 2007; Schilpzand 
et al., 2015 ). On a larger, more international scale, defiance of abuse of 
power can be  seen in civil unrest against governments perceived 
as unjust.
Speculations in the Western world on the nature of courage date 
back at least to ancient Greece. Of particular relevance would 
be philosophical accounts by Epictetus (1983), Aristotle (1985), Plato 
(1987), Aquinas (1960), and Sartre (1967). In the Eastern world, 
Confucius (1992)  also wrote about courage. A comprehensive 
philosophical review of the concept of courage can be  found in 
Putman (2010).
Pury and Lopez (2010)  compiled the reflections of modern 
psychologists on the notion of courage. Lopez et al. (2010)  examined 
folk conceptions of courage and concluded that an essential element 
of courage is the presence of personal risk. Perhaps the most accepted 
definition of courage was devised by Rate et al. (2007) , Rate (2010); 
see also Rate and Sternberg (2007). By examining implicit theories 
(folk conceptions) of courage, they characterized courage (a) as 
representing an act that is willful and intentional; (b) that is executed 
after reflective and mindful deliberation; (c) that presents an objective, 
substantial risk to the individual; (d) that is motivated primarily, 
although not necessarily exclusively, in the service of a worthy purpose 
or a noble good; and (e) that is enacted despite the challenge of feeling 
fearful. Rate (2010), in subsequent research presenting an explicit 
theory based on the collection of empirical data, suggested as 
necessary elements: intentionality, objective and substantial risk, and 
a noble purpose. We now discuss each of these three aspects in greater 
detail below.
2.2.1 Courageous acts are intentional and 
deliberate
Consistent with Rate and colleagues’ definition (Rate et al., 2007 ; 
Rate, 2010), we maintain that courageous acts are intentional and 
deliberate. Although some courageous acts may occur almost 
instantaneously, for example, saving someone from drowning in a 
pool, many courageous acts are pursued intentionally but emerge out 
of deliberate thinking (Shelp, 1984; Rate et al., 2007; Pury and Starkey, 
2010; Rate, 2010 ). A dual-system theory ( Kahneman, 2011) can 
be used to explain these two types of responses. In urgent situations, 
time is a critical factor, as it can drastically affect the outcome. Such 
situations may initiate a Type I or intuitive response (e.g., immediately 
jumping into a pool to save a drowning person). Other situations that 
afford deliberation may invoke a slower and more analytic Type II 
response. In this article, we  focus primarily on Type II thinking, 
conceptualizing courage as an intentional and deliberate process.
2.2.2 Courageous acts require risk management
Most definitions and theoretical models of courage view courage 
as a goal-directed process that involves weighing potential personal 
risks and noble or morally worthy outcomes before taking action 
(MacIntyre, 1981; Shelp, 1984; Worline, 2004, 2012; Hannah et al., 
2007; Rate et al., 2007 ; Quinn and Worline, 2008; Lopez et al., 2010 ; 
Rate, 2010; Koerner, 2014; Schilpzand et  al., 2015 ). Research has 
consistently shown that perceptions of the potential risks versus 
benefits of a particular action influence the decision to take risks 
(Moore and Gullone, 1996; Foster et al., 2009; Zhang et al., 2016). This 
risk–benefit analysis can be  explained through the concept of 
approach-avoidance conflict (Lewin, 1931; Miller, 1944; Dollard and 
Miller, 1950), as discussed later in the description of the proposed 
dual-process model of courage.
2.2.3 Courageous acts promote a noble purpose
A courageous act involves risk management, but courage cannot 
be reduced to calculating risks and benefits (Shelp, 1984; Rate et al., 
2007; Rate, 2010). Courage is primarily motivated by a desire to bring 
about a worthy or noble purpose ( Shelp, 1984 ; Walton, 1986 ; 
Woodard, 2004; Rate et  al., 2007 ; Woodard and Pury, 2007; Rate, 
Chowkase et al. 10.3389/fpsyg.2024.1376195
Frontiers in Psychology 03 frontiersin.org
2010). Courage entails at least as much interest in the welfare of others 
and of society as it does interest in one’s own welfare. In other words, 
courage cannot primarily originate in the pursuit of self-interest or 
fame. Rather, truly courageous actors act out of noble motivations 
(Shelp, 1984; Walton, 1986; Woodard, 2004; Rate et al., 2007; Woodard 
and Pury, 2007 ; Rate, 2010). Although “noble” can mean several 
things, researchers often use it to mean prosocial, moral, or virtuous 
(Shelp, 1984 ; Rate, 2010 ; Howard and Alipour, 2014 ; Howard 
et al., 2017 ).
However, it is worth noting that many people consider actions 
they have taken only for their own benefit but not directly for others’ 
welfare (e.g., going on a roller coaster) as courageous (Finfgeld, 1999; 
Pury et al., 2007 ; Muris, 2009; Pury and Saylors, 2017 ). Pury and 
Starkey (2010) have observed that, at times, individuals can exhibit 
what might be characterized as bad courage, or the courage to pursue 
an action that may seem noble to oneself, but that is morally misguided 
and possibly reprehensible. That is, the person convinces themselves 
that they are acting for a good cause when they are actually acting for 
a bad cause. For example, terrorist attacks are sometimes justified as 
serving a noble purpose, when, in fact, they tragically result in the 
disruption, ruination, and often, loss of innocent lives (Silke, 2004). 
Similarly, “bad courage” can be seen through state terrorism, which is 
often rationalized as a necessary evil in order to protect the state, yet, 
most often amounts to giving dictators unrestricted power. However, 
we focus on courage that is essentially directed at achieving a noble 
goal. Leaving out the pursuit of a noble goal from the construal of 
courage allows for validating and even justifying evil acts as 
courageous and, therefore, societally accepted.
2.2.4 Courageous acts are viewed in context
In addition to intentionality, objective and substantial risk, and a 
noble purpose, we posit that courage is contextual and the designation 
of an act as “courageous” can vary, depending on the time, culture, and 
place (Shelp, 1984; Pury et al., 2007 ; Howard and Cogswell, 2019; 
Sternberg, 2022b). What is considered courageous by some may not 
be seen the same way by others. For example, Rosa Parks’s refusal to 
give up her seat to a White man on a bus in Montgomery, Alabama in 
1955, is now widely accepted as a courageous action. It served the 
noble cause of standing up to racism; it was an intentional, deliberate, 
and risky action; and it was radical in a time when people of color 
were expected to give up their seats to White persons and were not 
permitted to sit near White persons. However, Rosa Parks’s act was not 
seen by all as courageous when it took place in 1955. At that time, 
some people almost certainly viewed Rosa Parks as foolish in her 
ability to manage risk and even as wrong or evil because they went 
against the “natural” order of society. In today’s world, it is not as 
surprising to see women taking a political stance. Many of them are 
leading various political movements, such as the ongoing protests by 
women in Iran (Alkhaldi and Ebrahim, 2022). Modern day examples 
that demonstrate courage is contextual include Caitlyn Jenner’s public 
gender transition and, on the other hand, Kim Davis’s refusal to issue 
same-gender marriage licenses. Their actions are contextually 
perceived as courageous by some, but not by others. The perception 
of courage is significantly based on the value the perceiver sees of the 
goal and, not just, the risk of the action (Pury et al., 2024 ).
The courageousness of an act also depends on the comparison 
group. Pury et al. (2007)  provided empirical evidence distinguishing 
general courage (actions that would be courageous for anyone to take) 
and personal courage (actions that are courageous only in the context 
of an individual’s life). On the one hand, actions displaying high levels 
of general courage are often perceived as courageous by others. On the 
other hand, actions demonstrating high levels of personal courage 
may be regarded as particularly noble by individuals familiar with the 
person but not necessarily by others.
In summary, we propose that courageous acts are intentional and 
deliberate endeavors that involve significant risk management, serve 
a noble purpose, and whose outcomes have an impact on the context, 
given the time and place. This definition may help to assess courageous 
acts as an overlap of all of the above-mentioned elements. However, 
this understanding is not prescriptive; rather, it is only descriptive. 
We believe it is impossible to evaluate the long-term outcomes of a 
courageous action in the immediate present. Nevertheless, examples 
from the past can inform our understanding of courage. By looking at 
past examples, we can identify and describe whether an action was 
courageous in terms of intentionality, deliberation, risk management, 
a noble purpose, and impact in the context of time and place.
Pury and Starkey (2010) proposed two ways of studying courage: 
as an accolade and as a process. As an accolade, courage is typically 
viewed as rare, lofty, and worthy of societal acknowledgment. On the 
other hand, courage is seen as a process by which people overcome 
subjectively felt risks for compelling reasons. Pury and Starkey (2010) 
further argue that the accolade perspective on courage offers 
information about people who have performed exceptionally well and 
how they are different from the rest. However, courage when studied 
as a process offers information about ways in which people come to 
act courageously.
Although in this section we have described courage as an act, the 
account presented above makes it clear that courage is also often 
believed to be the result of a deliberate process (Rate et al., 2007; Pury 
and Starkey, 2010 ; Rate, 2010 ), thereby allowing courage to 
be investigated as a psychological process involving several connected 
steps and decisions. However, few scholars have proposed and 
validated detailed process models of courage (but see, e.g., Hannah 
et  al., 2007 ; Sekerka and Bagozzi, 2007 ; Schilpzand et  al., 2015 ). 
Although there is ample scholarship that focuses on the elements of 
courage, there is still a dearth of studies that clarify and organize the 
complex concept of courage into a structured framework of processes. 
Therefore, in this article, we propose a dual-process model of courage. 
By delineating the process into various stages and assessments, our 
model aims to provide clarity on how courage unfolds and what 
factors influence courageous behavior. Moreover, understanding the 
process of courage can have practical applications in various domains, 
including psychology, education, organizational behavior, and 
leadership development. Our model offers insights into how 
individuals evaluate and navigate challenging situations, make 
decisions under uncertainty, and manage risk in pursuit of noble 
goals. This understanding can inform interventions, training 
programs, and organizational policies aimed at fostering courage. By 
identifying critical assessment points and exit paths, the model offers 
insights into factors that may facilitate or inhibit courageous behavior. 
This predictive aspect may enable researchers and practitioners to 
anticipate when and how individuals are likely to act courageously, as 
well as to develop strategies for cultivating courage in individuals and 
organizations. In proposing this new model, we integrate insights 
from various disciplines, including psychology, ethics, and decision 
theory, into a unified framework. This interdisciplinary approach 
Chowkase et al. 10.3389/fpsyg.2024.1376195
Frontiers in Psychology 04 frontiersin.org
allows for a comprehensive understanding of courage that goes 
beyond traditional disciplinary boundaries. By synthesizing existing 
research findings and theories, our model potentially contributes to a 
more holistic understanding of courage and its determinants. 
Although our definition of courage focuses on the pursuit of a noble 
goal, the process model we propose can possibly apply to other types 
of courage (e.g., bad courage, personal courage) where the focus on 
pursuing a noble goal is not considered essential.
To facilitate a detailed explanation of the model, throughout the 
article, we use the example of ongoing protests in Iran against the 
brutalities of the autocratic regime. For context, a series of protests 
and civil unrest against the Iranian regime was sparked in September 
2022 after the death of 22-year-old Mahsa Amini, who was arrested 
and beaten by the ironically labeled “morality police” for violating 
Iran’s mandatory dress code for women ( Alkhaldi and Ebrahim, 
2022; Reuters, 2022a ). In response to the protests, the Iranian 
government has been using brutal and utterly cruel security forces 
to curb the protests. By April 2023, more than 530 protestors had lost 
their lives, including about 70 minors; and 22,000 have been jailed 
(Karimi and Gambrell, 2023). Despite the brutal repression and the 
enormous risk to their lives, resistance has been growing in Iran, 
with the hope, on the part of the resistors, of seeing a positive 
change. The courage demonstrated by many Iranians, especially 
women and students, is evident in this example. Therefore, we refer 
to this example throughout this article to elaborate on the proposed 
process model of courage.
3 Courage as a process
We are not the first to present a process model of courage. 
However, our contribution is novel in that it draws on modern 
conceptions of Type I (fast and intuitive) and Type II (reflective, 
deliberative) thinking. Hannah et al. (2007)  devised a Subjective 
Experience of Courage model, in which they set forth the notion 
that a courageous mindset promotes an individual’s skills and 
systems to combat fear and replaces that fear with a courageous act. 
Sekerka and Bagozzi (2007)  devised a process-orientation theory 
for conceptualizing moral courage. Their theory highlights personal 
choice as an indispensable component, as well as the presence of an 
ethical dilemma that serves as the impetus for courageous action. 
Schilpzand et  al. (2015)  evaluated courage from a workplace 
perspective and set forth a two-pronged model, beginning with an 
assessment of individual responsibility in relation to a challenge and 
subsequently factoring in the potential social consequences 
of acting.
Our model expands upon its predecessors and broadens the scope 
of the situations viewed as potentially eliciting courageous acts. It 
further takes into account how one deliberately engages in moral 
considerations and risk assessment to approach or avoid situations 
needing courage. Our model aims to emphasize the role of individual 
agency as well as the recursive nature of the process of courage to 
represent the dynamic decision-making process applicable to a variety 
of situations. In this regard, our model is different from models that 
focus only on workplace dynamics (e.g., Sekerka and Bagozzi, 2007; 
Schilpzand et al., 2015 ) and from models that focus only on some 
attributes of courage, such as risk-taking and goal value (e.g., Pury 
et al., 2024 ).
4 A dual-process model view of 
courage
Courage has traditionally been thought to be  the result of 
attributes such as integrity, honor, valor, independence, a sense of 
duty, selflessness, loyalty (Park et al., 2004 ), bravery, persistence, and 
vitality (Pury and Kowalski, 2007). However, we now view courage as 
a multi-stage process that involves assessing a situation, as driven by 
both prosocial emotions and cognitive recognition of an opportunity 
to right a wrong or potential wrong.
In this article, we aim to extend current understandings of the 
psychological construct of courage. In Figure 1 , we propose a dual-
process model consisting of various decision-based pathways by 
which individuals come to enact a courageous action, or not. This 
model can be used to examine and influence the decision-making 
process underlying courageous actions. It also can help to understand 
how and why an individual in a particular challenging situation 
proceeded with their chosen action.
According to our dual-process model of courage, courage 
commences with a trigger that involves an actor or actors and a 
particular situation. This actor is tasked with making four critical 
assessments, encompassing (a) the immediacy of the situation; (b) its 
meaningfulness, relevance, and value to the actor; (c) one’s self-
efficacy to act; and (d) the decision to act with courage.
Courage entails an approach-avoidance conflict, guided by moral 
considerations in pursuit of a noble goal, that necessitates deliberate 
assessments of perceived risks and potential morally commendable 
outcomes. The decision to act may lead to courageous actions, 
provided the decision aligns with the elements of courage in the 
previously mentioned definition: intentionality, deliberation, risk 
management, noble intent, and impact in a specific time and place. 
These actions can yield various outcomes or consequences, and these 
outcomes, in turn, can shape the actors’ experiences, thus completing 
a feedback loop. Notably, the dual-process model encompasses four 
exit paths, one corresponding to each assessment point.
4.1 Trigger
Like many behavioral models, we  propose that the process of 
displaying courage commences with a trigger. Courage emerges in 
response to situations characterized by significant personal risks, threats, 
and obstacles, as noted in previous studies (Cavanagh and Moberg, 1999; 
Harris, 2001; Lopez et al., 2010). This courage-inducing trigger can take 
various forms, including the actor’s current circumstances (e.g., poverty), 
their emotional state (e.g., a sense of outrage at injustice), or a specific 
event (e.g., a fire out of control). It is essential to emphasize that the 
trigger need not necessarily be life-threatening; it also can be rooted in 
the actor’s worldview, often influenced by their previous experiences, 
personal histories, and societal norms. In our example of the Iranian 
protests, Mahsa Amini’s death served as the trigger that motivated 
Iranian citizens to confront the injustices committed by their 
government, and then to resist police brutality.
A trigger can be situational and have the potential to elicit a wide 
range of emotions, including fear, anger, disgust, and compassion. 
Many scholars in the field of courage, such as Shelp (1984), Peterson 
and Seligman (2004), Rachman (2004), Woodard (2004), Woodard 
and Pury (2007), Rate et al. (2007) , and Kilmann et al. (2013) , have 
Chowkase et al. 10.3389/fpsyg.2024.1376195
Frontiers in Psychology 05 frontiersin.org
suggested a close link between courage and fear. Pury et al. (2007)  
have demonstrated that fear and confidence (self-efficacy) are 
distinctively related to general courage (actions considered courageous 
for anyone) and personal courage (actions courageous within the 
context of an individual’s life).
Their research reveals that actions demonstrating high levels of 
general courage are characterized by substantial confidence and 
minimal fear. Conversely, actions displaying high levels of personal 
courage involve acting despite fear, adversity, and individual 
limitations. Although there is some evidence suggesting that a small 
group of people may not experience fear, even in high-risk situations 
(Rachman, 2004), empirical support for fear as a typical, though not 
essential, component of courage appears relatively weak. Nonetheless, 
it is important to note that fear can be diminished through repeated 
acts of risk-taking, as seen in contexts such as military training and 
practice (Walk, 1956), or when individuals have adequate resources to 
cope with adversity (Rachman, 2004). Therefore, further research is 
required to gain a deeper understanding of the intricacies of the 
relationship between fear and courage.
4.2 The first assessment: urgency of the 
situation
Once triggered, the initial assessment in the courage process may 
not necessarily be well-thought-out. Instead, it often represents an 
FIGURE 1
The dual-process model of courage.
Chowkase et al. 10.3389/fpsyg.2024.1376195
Frontiers in Psychology 06 frontiersin.org
intuitive and immediate assessment of the situation to determine if an 
urgent response is required. For instance, individuals faced with dire 
circumstances, like a house fire or a child drowning, may not have the 
luxury of time to reflect on the situation or to consider the 
consequences of their actions. In such cases, they must rely on instinct 
and act without much deliberation. However, in less immediately 
challenging situations, individuals may have the opportunity to take 
some time to process the situation and act more deliberately.
In the dual-system theory (dual-process theory) proposed by 
Kahneman (2011), human cognition is regulated by two distinct 
systems or modes: System I for fast, intuitive, and effortless thinking, 
and System II for slower, analytic, and effortful thinking. Although 
some acts of courage may indeed arise intuitively due to the urgency 
of the situation, most courageous acts involve deliberation and 
reflection. In other words, although some intuitive courageous 
responses might result from the automatic and often unconscious 
operations of System I, such as rescuing someone from a burning 
building, the majority of acts of courage entail the controlled 
operations of System II. These controlled operations demand more 
significant cognitive effort ( Kahneman, 2011 ), particularly in 
situations requiring courage, such as the ongoing situation in Iran. 
Therefore, our model primarily focuses on the controlled operations 
of System II. Nevertheless, this focus is not to downplay the role of 
intuitive courage in everyday life, especially in emergencies where 
Type II thinking would be too time-consuming. However, when the 
situation permits time for deliberation, we  propose that the actor 
typically deploys Type II thinking.
4.3 Type II thinking: risk assessment, moral 
considerations, and approach-avoidance 
conflict
Arguably, the most important component of this model is Type II 
thinking (Kahneman, 2011) – that is, slower, analytic, and effortful 
thinking potentially involving several moral and risk considerations. 
On one hand, courageous actors show a willingness to assume 
substantial personal risk to pursue a noble goal (approach motivation), 
but on the other hand, they also consider the risks involved in such a 
pursuit (avoidance motivation). In this primarily cognitive process, 
the actors identify the courageous actions that potentially can help 
achieve the noble goal and the risks associated with potentially taking 
those actions; they then engage in deliberate moral reasoning, and 
perhaps a moral dilemma as to whether to engage with the situation.
The actor experiences approach-avoidance conflict and may 
deliberately engage in a personally satisfying resolution (Dollard and 
Miller, 1950). Here, the actor engages in three major systems: (a) a 
behavioral activation system, prompted by morally rewarding 
stimuli, such as the pursuit of a noble goal (approach motivation); 
(b) a fight-flight-freeze system, prompted by harmful or threatening 
stimuli, such as the risks involved (avoidance motivation); and (c) a 
behavioral inhibition system, prompted by negotiation between 
potential noble outcomes and perceived risks (approach-avoidance 
conflict) (McNaughton and Gray, 2000; Corr, 2013).
An approach-avoidance conflict arises when an actor is both 
drawn to and repulsed by the same trigger ( Lewin, 1931 ; Miller, 
1944; Dollard and Miller, 1950 ). Consequently, the System II 
decision the actor makes about approaching or avoiding the situation 
results from reaching a point of negotiation between the relative 
valences of perceived risks and potential noble outcomes that may 
arise out of acting courageously. For example, in the Iranian protests, 
approach-avoidance conflict involves conflict between potential 
risks to life and safety (avoidance) and the pursuit of a positive 
change in the lives of Iranian women (approach). The Iranian regime 
has repeatedly used various brutal and, indeed, savage methods to 
curb the protests, such as shutting down Internet and cellphone 
service, arresting journalists, performing mass detentions, and 
torturing captured protestors (France 24, 2022; Reuters, 2022a,b). 
Evidently, the risks of participating in the ongoing protests can 
be grave. However, the pursuit of a positive change in women’s lives 
seems at least as strong, at least for some Iranians, as the protests are 
still active.
A situation involving a greater perceived risk will involve a 
greater approach-avoidance conflict and will, therefore, demand 
greater courage. The anterior hippocampus area appears to be central 
in the processing of approach-avoidance conflict ( Bach et al., 2014 ; 
O'Neil et al., 2015 ; see Ito and Lee, 2016, for a review). Bach et al. 
(2014) gave neurologically healthy participants a computerized task 
involving approach-avoidance conflict, as administered under three 
different levels of threat. When the likelihood of threat increased and 
so did the level of approach-avoidance conflict, the participants 
displayed greater avoidance behavior and behavioral inhibition. 
These changes in avoidance behavior were accompanied by changes 
in hippocampal activity. When the threat level increased, 
hippocampal activity also increased, suggesting the hippocampal 
area of the human brain played an important role in approach-
avoidance conflict processing.
As is typical of System II thinking, the actors can be expected to 
engage in serial, conscious, and consequential decision-making 
(Kahneman, 2011). For example, approach-avoidance conflict may 
involve carefully assessing the relative values of available options and 
ascertaining, as well as one can, the price, probability, and magnitude 
of the consequences associated with various outcomes ( Rolls and 
Grabenhorst, 2008; Quartz, 2009; Aupperle Robin and Paulus Martin, 
2010). From a motivational perspective, two key determinants of 
choice are the relative values of various options and the expectancies 
of success (Eccles and Wigfield, 2002). The value component depicts 
the desirability of a particular goal (i.e., “Why would I engage in such 
an activity?”), whereas the expectancy component represents an 
individual’s beliefs about how well they will do in an activity (i.e., “Can 
I be successful in doing this activity?”). We discuss these two key 
considerations in the next two subsections.
4.4 The second assessment: value, 
meaningfulness, and relevance
When confronted with a situational trigger, individuals may face 
yet another assessment regarding whether or not the situation presents 
an adequately personally valuable and meaningful goal. An individual 
would possibly consider engaging with the situation as personally 
meaningful because it might help them get closer to a valued goal. A 
situation requiring courage can hold significance for individuals 
because it is closely intertwined with their own lives, falls within their 
circle of concern, and is morally commendable. For example, 
employees feel motivated to act courageously when the cause is 
Chowkase et al. 10.3389/fpsyg.2024.1376195
Frontiers in Psychology 07 frontiersin.org
meaningful to them and they feel a sense of personal responsibility 
(Schilpzand et al., 2015).
Individuals are more inclined to engage in a risky situation when 
it involves people, ideas, or moral principles about which they care 
deeply (Shelp, 1984). For example, many advocates for LGBTQ+ rights 
are members of the LGBTQ+ community themselves and draw upon 
their personal experiences of discrimination as motivation to 
champion this cause. The same principle applies to Iranian citizens 
and members of the diaspora who have taken to the streets to advocate 
for Iranian women’s rights because the issue directly affects their 
daily lives.
Actors can also attribute personal meaning to a situation even if it 
does not directly involve them or anyone in their immediate social 
circle. This sense of meaning may arise from their ability to expand 
their circle of concern. Driven by an elevated sense of 
interconnectedness, compassion, and empathy, actors can form 
connections with strangers, including members of outgroups, 
motivated by a focus on a superordinate identity and a recognition of 
common humanity ( Chowkase, 2022 , 2023; Chowkase and 
Watve, 2022).
From a virtue perspective, considerations of moral principles can 
also guide the decision-making process ( Peterson and Seligman, 
2004). On perceiving a challenging situation, an individual may 
recognize its moral and ethical importance. They may view the 
situation as an opportunity to act in accordance with their core moral 
ideals (Bredemeier and Shields, 2006; Schwartz et al., 2012). In doing 
so, the actor may reflect on their fundamental moral values, such as 
integrity, equity, and fairness, and consider how their potential acts in 
a given situation can exemplify these virtues and put their moral 
character into action ( Peterson and Seligman, 2004 ; Lapsley and 
Carlo, 2014 ). Moreover, the individual may recognize that their 
actions can positively impact themselves, others, or the greater good. 
They then may feel that it is incumbent upon them to act accordingly 
(Brown and Treviño, 2014). Such a sense of duty and perceived ethical 
responsibility may motivate an individual to approach a 
challenging situation.
The extent to which an individual musters the courage to act may 
depend, in part, on the values the situation holds for them. In other 
words, if the actor perceives the challenging situation, their action in 
response, and its potential consequences as promoting personally 
valued goals, they are more likely to engage with the situation. 
Conversely, if they do not find the situation personally meaningful, 
they may opt to disengage from it, as indicated in Figure 1  with a 
stop symbol.
The greater the degree of meaningfulness the situation holds for 
the actor, the more likely they are to engage with it and exhibit 
courageous behavior. However, it is crucial to note that meaningfulness 
alone is not sufficient; the actors’ willingness to act courageously may 
also be influenced by their expectancy regarding the likely outcome 
and by their self-efficacy beliefs.
4.5 The third assessment: efficacy
In the process of displaying courage, the next assessment concerns 
beliefs about an individual’s ability to perform a courageous action 
and to achieve success in that action. Bandura (1977) defined outcome 
expectancy as a person’s estimate that a given behavior will lead to 
certain outcomes. If an actor does not believe in the possibility of a 
successful outcome, then the behavior leading to that outcome is 
unlikely to occur. Additionally, actors need self-efficacy or confidence 
in their ability to perform the action ( Bandura, 1982 ). In this 
assessment, actors evaluate whether or not they believe they have the 
resources or skills needed to execute the action successfully. For 
instance, do they have confidence in their skills to act courageously? 
Do they think they have enough information, strategies, and tools to 
effectively engage in a protest? Considering the potential repercussions 
of joining the protest, are they still confident they can achieve success 
by joining?
Although specific beliefs about one’s ability and one’s likelihood of 
success are predictive of one’s behaviors, one specific form of self-
efficacy belief may be most relevant to courage. Moral self-efficacy is 
one’s confidence in one’s ability to handle ethical problems (May et al., 
2014). For courage to be enacted, the actors display high confidence 
in their ability to act morally in the situation and that they have a 
chance to succeed with their action(s). However, if actors lack 
sufficient moral self-efficacy in a situation, despite possessing strong 
approach motivation, they are likely to exit the situation. Cognitively, 
they may know what is moral in the situation, perceive the risks and 
potential noble outcomes well, and want to approach the situation. Y et, 
they may decide to leave the situation because they lack the confidence 
to act morally. This situation is indicated with a “stop” symbol in 
Figure 1 . However, when the actors feel sufficiently self-efficacious 
about handling the situation and especially feel sufficiently confident 
to take a moral stand, they are likely to proceed to the next step.
In the case of protests in Iran, many Iranian people have shown 
exemplary self-efficacy–the confidence that they can win their 
fundamental rights. Thus, they have continued to resist the abusive 
power structure, regardless of violent threats from the regime 
(Rajvanshi, 2022).
4.6 The fourth assessment: decision to 
engage
After consolidating information from all the previous assessments, 
the actor arrives at the final assessment regarding whether to engage 
in the courage-demanding situation or not. When the actors 
sufficiently value engaging with the situation and have enough self-
efficacy, and therefore, have the motivation to engage, they are likely 
to decide to engage in the situation and perform a courageous act.
When avoidance motivation or the fight-flight-freeze system 
dominates the processing of a conflict, the actors are more likely to 
cave in and avoid the situation, regardless of their desire to confront 
the situation. Importantly, avoidance is an active decision made to 
avoid potential adverse outcomes, such as getting arrested while 
protesting against the government.
In contrast, when approach motivation or the behavioral-
activation system dominates the processing of the conflict, actors can 
be expected to engage with the situation, despite impending risks. 
Strong approach motivation may emerge in a situation such as the one 
in which Rosa Parks found herself on a bus in Montgomery, Alabama; 
despite her knowing that refusing to give up her seat most likely would 
lead to adverse outcomes, she remained seated. Her will to fight for 
Chowkase et al. 10.3389/fpsyg.2024.1376195
Frontiers in Psychology 08 frontiersin.org
her rights and the rights of people of color all across the United States 
trumped her fear of any impending consequences. She was fired from 
her job following the bus boycott and received death threats for 
years afterward.
In more recent times, heroic individuals such as Alexei 
Navalny, a prominent anti-corruption activist in Russia, and 
Narges Mohammadi, an Iranian human rights activist and Nobel 
laureate, have demonstrated courage similar to that of Rosa Parks 
and are facing brutal consequences for their courageous actions. 
Navalny’s actions are recognized as modern examples of 
unwavering courage against corruption, with some suggesting his 
name become synonymous with resilience and courage ( Bazargan, 
2024). He  was recognized most distinctly for publishing 
corruption-exposing investigations against Putin’s regime 
(Chappell, 2024 ). The world mourns his passing on February 16th, 
2024, with thousands of supporters attending his funeral in Russia 
on March 1st, 2024 ( Hopkins, 2024 ). As evident in these examples, 
approach, like avoidance, is also an active decision and may involve 
sacrificing, possibly forever, personal safety, pleasures, or 
self-interest.
Most often, courage requires possessing and demonstrating 
strong approach motivation. For example, in the case of the 
ongoing protests in Iran, people’s courage lies in confronting the 
unjust and powerful system, despite risks and other impediments 
to action. In this case, approach motivation thrives on the potential 
noble outcomes the protests may yield, namely, gaining human 
rights for Iranian women. Other motivators are attaining better 
visibility for the women’s poor condition, gaining people’s support 
within and outside Iran, and possibly bringing about systemic 
change in the oppressive regime. When the actors lack the 
necessary level of relevant motivation, they are most likely to exit 
the situation without engaging with it any further. This situation is 
indicated in Figure 1  with a “stop” symbol.
This decision to engage also involves strategizing about how 
the courageous act will be  deployed. In this decision, actors 
identify clear goals and design a strategic plan to carry out the 
courageous act. However, at this point, it is also possible that they 
decide to exit the situation. They might understand the urgency, 
see the value, have efficacy, and feel motivated, but ultimately fail 
to identify clear goals or execute an adequate plan to attain a 
successful outcome. They therefore exit the situation. This exit is 
indicated with a stop symbol in Figure 1 .
The decision to engage also requires a strategy as to when to 
act. Imagine a risky situation in which acting with patience may 
be  more beneficial for the sought-after noble cause than 
immediately acting with courage. For example, in situations that 
make one wonder “if that is the hill they want to die on, ” in the 
context of a more important goal, the actor may choose not to 
engage immediately, despite the urge to act courageously. This 
choice can be exemplified by the idea of “losing a battle to win a 
war. ” In situations like these, although the actor is not avoiding the 
situation, they are not immediately approaching it either. Instead, 
they are looking for a more appropriate time to act, despite having 
the necessary courage and motivation to act. Consequently, the 
actor may decide to wait until a later time, despite checking all 
the prerequisites of the process of acting courageously listed in the 
previous steps.
4.7 Action
Once the actor has decided to engage, they commit to the situation 
and perform the courageous act. Their act may include multiple 
sub-actions. For example, if, after witnessing bullying in class, a 
student decides to respond to the situation, they may speak up 
immediately, intervene in the situation, gather help, record the 
incident, reach out to the authorities, and/or inform parents. After the 
incident, they may follow up on the case, write about it in the school’s 
magazine, become an explicit ally of the victim, or even start a school-
wide anti-bullying campaign. All of these actions are courageous ones 
that were triggered by witnessing the bullying behavior.
Similarly, in the case of the protests in Iran, the protestors have 
chosen a variety of relevant actions. These actions include arranging 
flash mobs, chanting slogans demanding basic human rights, blocking 
streets to slow down security forces, organizing sit-down strikes, 
symbolically burning and tearing off hijabs (women’s headscarves), 
dismantling public “security” cameras, chanting from rooftops and 
windows, dyeing fountains in blood-red colors, women symbolically 
cutting their hair, students boycotting classes, and professors resigning 
from their government jobs (Alkhaldi and Ebrahim, 2022; France 24, 
2022; Luo and Umar, 2022; Reuters, 2022a,b).
Courageous actions can take a wide range of forms. They can 
be  episodic (one-time) or frequent; simple or elaborate; mild or 
intense; overt or covert; subtle or explicit; and commonplace or heroic. 
The courageous actions can manifest through thoughts and emotions; 
expressed as words and visuals; and as physical acts involving gestures 
and steps. There can be multiple courageous actions for a particular 
situation, but the effectiveness of an action cannot be fully predicted 
in advance. Navigating such uncertainty is inherent to acting 
courageously (Shelp, 1984). Acting courageously often does not yield 
the hoped-for result. In fact, it may even yield the opposite, undesirable 
result, which invites a discussion on the outcomes of courage.
4.8 Outcomes
Courageous actions have consequences, and each action may 
result in a different outcome. These outcomes can be good or bad, or 
a little of each; positive and negative, or a little of each; desirable and 
undesirable, or a little of each. For example, in our previous example 
of Iranian protests, each individual action can result in different 
outcomes. Protestors’ immediate decisions have invited brutal 
retaliation from the government (France 24, 2022; Rajvanshi, 2022). 
Participating in sit-down strikes or public marches has resulted in 
mass arrests and detentions. Even worse, at least seven protestors have 
been judicially executed for disturbing public order ( Fassihi and 
Engelbrecht, 2023). Moreover, hundreds of protestors, including 
children, have died while resisting the security forces (Reuters, 2022b). 
Regardless, the final and collective outcome of these protests might 
be more positive and desirable than the abovementioned deaths and 
arrests, where Iranian women may see a systemic change in their life 
circumstances through a dramatic change in Iran’s regime and 
legislation. However, the final outcome cannot be predicted at the 
moment. Analysts are seeing the unrest as an intermediate possible 
step toward long-term political change (Reuters, 2022b). In that sense, 
the current protests may serve only as an intermediate outcome and 
Chowkase et al. 10.3389/fpsyg.2024.1376195
Frontiers in Psychology 09 frontiersin.org
may not achieve the ultimate goals. This, in no way, undermines the 
courage currently demonstrated by Iranian protestors. Today’s 
courageous actions can serve as a stepping stone for the next actions.
4.9 Experience
The outcomes of one’s courageous action can shape the actors’ 
experience, and that experience in turn can shape their knowledge 
about the situation, the actions they undertook, and the results to 
which those actions led. This knowledge can then feed into the actors’ 
memory, shape their worldview, and serve as a trigger in a similar 
situation in the future. Additionally, as actors take opportunities to 
express courage, they can gain wisdom about the situation through the 
process, which in turn can influence further experiences (Glück and 
Bluck, 2013). The experience component and its allied processes thus 
close the loop of the processes of courage that started with a trigger. For 
example, as predicted by some analysts (Reuters, 2022b), the current 
protests in Iran may not result in an immediate dramatic change in the 
country’s political leadership. However, the experience of this ongoing 
resistance may set the Iranian people up for future fights for their 
rights. Courage, especially in the context of a major systemic change, 
can be  seen as an iterative process of trigger-deliberation-action-
outcome-experience. In this process, the experience gained from the 
previous iteration may feed into the next cycle, and the loop may 
continue. Eventually, it may even end in success.
5 Potential moderators of the process 
of courage
Several factors, such as personality traits, wisdom, prior 
experience with sociocultural norms, and demographics can influence 
the processes of courage.
5.1 Personality traits
An individual’s dominant personality traits can be predictive of 
how they will respond to a situation that invites courageous action. 
Howard and Cogswell (2019) provided evidence of the relationship 
between behavioral social courage and personality traits. In their 
study, among personal and contextual variables, grit and proactive 
personality were significant predictors of courageous behavior in the 
workplace. On the one hand, if an actor is accustomed to defying the 
Zeitgeist or, perhaps, is open to new experiences, they may be more 
inclined to take the courageous route (Sternberg, 2018). On the other 
hand, someone who is timid and less tolerant of adverse experiences, 
which can be assumed to follow courageous acts, would be less likely 
to act courageously. Furthermore, perceptions of risk and outcomes 
of risk-taking are important facets of courage. Several personality 
traits can influence these facets. To that end, narcissistic personality 
has been linked with elevated risk-taking, which has further been 
found to be fueled by heightened perceptions of benefits stemming 
from risky behaviors (Foster et al., 2009 ). Such risk-taking, however, 
is not necessarily courageous but rather may be directed solely toward 
self-interest.
The enlisted personality traits are only representative and not 
exhaustive. A detailed review of courage-relevant personality traits is 
out of the scope of this article. However, it would be  prudent to 
examine different personality characteristics--dispositional, 
situational, and interactive--in relation to their influence on the 
courage process.
5.2 Wisdom
Wisdom is relevant to courage, as actors engaging in courage-
demanding situations employ tacit knowledge in balancing their own 
and others’ interests, all in favor of pursuing a noble goal (Sternberg, 
2024). Baltes and Staudinger (2000)  defined wisdom as an expert 
knowledge system concerning the fundamental pragmatics of life, 
which include knowledge and judgment about the meaning of life and 
humankind’s progression toward excellence while attending to 
personal and collective well-being. This definition has been expanded 
upon by other scholars to include more specific characteristics, 
including intellectual humility, recognition of uncertainty and change, 
consideration and integration of different perspectives, self-regulation, 
altruism and moral maturity, openness and tolerance, concern for 
others, reflective attitude, cognitive ability, insight, and real-world 
skills (Sternberg, 1998, 2019, 2024; Bluck and Glück, 2005; Grossman, 
2017; Karami et  al., 2020 ). A comprehensive review of wisdom 
research is beyond the scope of this article (see Sternberg and Glück, 
2021, for a review). However, it is crucial to acknowledge the aspect 
of integration and dynamic balance cuts across the various wisdom 
models mentioned above.
An act would not be deemed courageous if it did not achieve the 
integration of the various aspects of wisdom. For example, someone 
could use their creativity and knowledge, but not their common sense 
and lack of concern for others to produce an action that might 
be more reckless and irresponsible than courageous. Imagine if the 
Civil Rights Movement in the USA of the 1960s resorted to violence 
and burning down public property. Such a rash and heedless act 
would have enabled the government and opposing civilians to crush 
the resistance, using brute force. Violence would jeopardize the safety 
of the protestors and undermine the entire movement as well. Using 
wisdom, therefore, becomes important as actors plan their 
courageous actions.
5.3 Experience with sociocultural norms
An actor’s personal experience with social and cultural norms 
can also have an impact on their willingness to act courageously in 
the face of such norms. Protests in Iran are a prime example of how 
people act courageously when socio-cultural norms act against a 
subgroup of people. Women in Iran are protesting against the 
norm that women should be disciplined for not wearing the Hijab 
(headscarf) that is mandated by the state. The protesting women 
are opposing this patriarchal and fundamentalist norm, which 
deprives them of freedom of choice. Mahsa Amini’s death, 
therefore, has triggered the women in Iran to embrace their 
womanhood and fight against the regime. Women are burning 
head scarves and cutting their hair in public as a symbol of an 
Chowkase et al. 10.3389/fpsyg.2024.1376195
Frontiers in Psychology 10 frontiersin.org
attack on their identity and resistance to unreasonable social 
norms (Luo and Umar, 2022 ).
Courage may be related to other cultural dimensions ( Howard 
and Cogswell, 2019 ), such as (a) power distance, or the extent to 
which less powerful members of groups accept and expect unequal 
power distributions; (b) uncertainty avoidance, or people’s level of 
comfort with unstructured situations; (c) collectivism–
individualism, or the extent to which people in a society are 
integrated into groups for which they bear a sense of responsibility; 
(d) humane orientation, or the extent to which people in society 
value the prosocial treatment of others; and (e) assertiveness, or 
the extent to which people in a society are assertive 
(Hofstede, 2011 ).
5.4 Demographics
Demographic factors such as gender and age also can influence 
the processes of courage ( Howard and Cogswell, 2019 ). In 
particular, courage has been traditionally treated, to some extent, 
as a gendered concept--men are expected to exhibit courageous 
actions more than women ( Pury and Lopez, 2010 ). Although there 
may be no real gender differences in courage, gender may still 
influence the decision-making involved in courageous action 
through social conditioning. Similarly, age can significantly 
influence courage. Specifically, in workplace settings, employees 
may become more courageous as they spend more time in an 
organization ( Howard and Cogswell, 2019 ).
6 Discussion
In this article, we  have argued that courage is often a 
deliberate process. We have proposed a conceptual model that 
describes what steps may be involved in courage, what kinds of 
factors might lead people to be  more or less likely to display 
courage, and what assessments people are likely to make when 
they choose to act courageously or not. In this section, we discuss 
the potential empirical tests of our model and describe the future 
directions that can emerge from our proposed process model 
of courage.
6.1 Potential tests of the model and future 
directions
Our article introduces a dual-process model of courage, aimed at 
understanding courage as a process. Empirical research is necessary 
to validate and refine this conceptual model. This research would 
involve validation, exploration and measurement, and application of 
the proposed process and its components. Below, we present only 
preliminary directions, and actual research could take numerous other 
forms. The objective of presenting these directions is to initiate a 
discussion on future research on this model.
6.1.1 Direction 1: validation
Validation is an essential step in establishing the credibility 
and utility of our model. A first assessment to yield evidence of 
the validity of our model might consist of testing the alignment 
of our model with real-world behaviors and outcomes related to 
courage. To assess the content validity of the proposed model, for 
example, researchers could create checklists and scales with items 
outlining behaviors associated with each step of our model. A 
panel of experts in the study of courage, decision-making, and 
related areas could be  asked to judge the relevance and 
representativeness of each of the items and the components. Then 
researchers can examine the factor structure of the instrument.
To gather validity evidence about the utility of the model, 
researchers could conduct interviews regarding courageous 
actions that key participants have witnessed or undertaken. 
Researchers could use the think-aloud strategy to ask participants 
to verbally recreate the perceived sequence of events. Similar to a 
study by Schilpzand et  al. (2015) , the collected data could 
be analyzed following the proposed model. The researchers asked 
participants to recount an event in which courage was displayed. 
Then, participant stories were used to assess components of 
courage in the researchers’ proposed model ( Schilpzand et al., 
2015). Results from the think-aloud could help researchers 
evaluate the salience or non-salience of the assessment points in 
our model. By comparing participants’ responses to the model’s 
expected outcomes; a closer match would indicate higher 
model accuracy.
6.1.2 Direction 2: exploration and measurement
Exploration involves further investigating and examining the 
relationships among factors that influence the processes of 
courage. Our model proposes that personality traits, wisdom, 
social norms, and demographics moderate the courage process. In 
essence, courage is a personality x task x situation interaction, as 
are many other psychological phenomena ( Sternberg et al., 2023 ). 
Whether a given person will be courageous will depend on the 
task they confront (e.g., saving a cat in a burning building vs. 
protesting for civil rights) and the situation in which they confront 
that task (e.g., the result might be disapproval of friends vs. life 
imprisonment). Courage always depends on intrapersonal 
variables, but also on the tasks at hand and the context in which 
they are presented.
Studies such as Howard and Cogswell’s (2019)  have explored 
some of these factors as predictors of courage in the context of 
social courage. Researchers could measure the extent to which 
motivation, wisdom, personality traits, and demographic variables 
influence courageous behaviors. Specifically, exploration efforts 
could lead to identifying the characteristics and contexts in which 
people are more likely to engage in courageous action.
Another future direction of this research would include 
developing a scale to better understand situated courageous 
actions and how people approach challenging situations. 
Participants can be  asked to select the extent to which they 
engaged in behaviors and thought processes related to our model. 
For example, using a Likert-type scale, to what extent they acted 
instinctively and instantaneously; assessed the situation as to 
whether it required an immediate response; weighed to what 
extent the situation was personally meaningful and how high the 
stakes were for the individual; engaged in moral considerations 
and risk assessment involved in the approach-avoidance conflict; 
analyzed potential outcomes and perceived likelihood to succeed; 
Chowkase et al. 10.3389/fpsyg.2024.1376195
Frontiers in Psychology 11 frontiersin.org
balanced interests of self and others; and reflected on the action 
and the whole situation. Our process model may be applied as a 
theoretical framework for this scale-development study.
6.1.3 Direction 3: application
The test of application consists of identifying the extent of the 
model’s usefulness. Our model aims to be  a model of general 
courage beyond existing models, which focus primarily on the 
workplace (e.g., Schilpzand et al., 2015 ). Researchers could apply 
the process model of courage to different contexts and domains to 
elicit behaviors related to courage. According to our proposed 
model, a courage process involves four assessments, namely, (a) 
immediacy of the situation; (b) meaningfulness, relevance, and 
value to the actor; (c) adequacy of efficacy to act; and (d) decision 
to act with courage. Participants would be given a set of open-
ended problems that require courageous action. Some examples 
might include (a) saving someone in a building on fire, (b) saving 
someone on a battlefield, (c) speaking the truth when one’s job is 
at risk, (d) speaking out publicly against a demagogue, and so on. 
Participants would be  asked to elaborate on their proposed 
solution. Researchers can examine the extent to which the 
participant solution (a) identifies the morally right thing to do in 
the situation, (b) realizes that one is taking an enormous personal 
risk, (c) realizes that one may not succeed, and so on. The 
prediction is that plausible solutions will match the assessment 
points and thought processes outlined in our model.
Finally, the model could be assessed against existing models of 
courage. For example, researchers could evaluate the conceptual 
clarity, empirical evidence, and predictive power, as well as the 
scope and applicability of our model compared to existing models. 
Researchers could assess courageous acts (actual or vignette 
examples) using multiple models, contrasting the strengths and 
weaknesses of each model in explaining the courageous acts. The 
goal of this assessment would be to further strengthen our model 
by pointing out opportunities to reduce conceptual overlaps, 
refining strategies to gather new data, or suggesting applications to 
enhance the courage process.
Overall, future research on this model should aim to extend the 
current understanding of the multidimensional construct of 
courage and refine our search for the processes involved in 
courageous behavior. This model can be seen as a framework for 
understanding the nature and underlying decision-making 
processes of courageous behavior. Using this process model, people 
could be asked to respond and reflect on each step of the flowchart. 
Perhaps this model could be  used to understand a variety of 
outcomes, such as people’s perceptions of courage, to identify 
triggers or situations that require courage, to illustrate processes 
and strategies by which courage can be elicited, and to ascertain 
what it takes to act courageously.
7 Conclusion
Courage is often part of the way we make choices about what is 
important, what to do, and how to go on in life in ways we view as 
worthwhile. Maintaining a view that courage is often a deliberate 
process, we have proposed a model that describes what steps may 
be involved in courage, what kinds of factors might lead people to 
be more or less likely to display courage, and what kinds of assessments 
people are likely to make when they choose to act courageously or not. 
We have shown how courage depends not only on the person but also 
on the particular tasks the person confronts and the situational 
context in which they are presented. The proposed dual-process 
model of courage can, thus, serve as a stepping-stone to understanding 
how to navigate decision-making in the face of difficult situations 
demanding courageous responses. Ultimately, navigating this process 
of courage is key to meeting many of the demands and challenges of 
our troubled world.
Data availability statement
The original contributions presented in the study are included in 
the article/supplementary material, further inquiries can be directed 
to the corresponding author.
Author contributions
AC: Conceptualization, Investigation, Methodology, Project 
administration, Supervision, Writing – original draft, Writing – review 
& editing, Visualization. FP-M: Conceptualization, Writing – original 
draft, Writing – review & editing. MG: Conceptualization, Writing – 
original draft, Writing – review & editing. ZB: Writing – original draft, 
Writing – review & editing. GF: Writing – original draft, Writing – 
review & editing. RS: Conceptualization, Supervision, Writing – 
original draft, Writing – review & editing.
Funding
The author(s) declare financial support was received for the 
research, authorship, and/or publication of this article. Publication 
made possible in part by support from the Berkeley Research Impact 
Initiative (BRII) sponsored by the UC Berkeley Library.
Conflict of interest
The authors declare that the research was conducted in the 
absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.
Publisher’s note
All claims expressed in this article are solely those of the 
authors and do not necessarily represent those of their affiliated 
organizations, or those of the publisher, the editors and the 
reviewers. Any product that may be evaluated in this article, or 
claim that may be made by its manufacturer, is not guaranteed or 
endorsed by the publisher.
Chowkase et al. 10.3389/fpsyg.2024.1376195
Frontiers in Psychology 12 frontiersin.org
References
Albright, M. (2018). Fascism: a warning. New Y ork, NY: Harper Collins.
Alkhaldi, C., and Ebrahim, N. (2022). Grief, protest, and power: Why Iranian women 
are cutting their hair. CNN. Available at: https://www.cnn.com/2022/09/28/middleeast/
iran-hair-cutting-mime-intl
Applebaum, A. (2021). The bad guys are winning. The Atlantic. Available at: https://
www.theatlantic.com/magazine/archive/2021/12/the-autocrats-are-winning/620526/
Aquinas, T. (1960). St. Thomas Aquinas: Philosophical texts  (T. Gilby, Trans.). 
Whitefish, MT: Galaxy Books.
Aristotle (1985). Nicomachean ethics  (IrwinT., Trans.). Indianapolis, IN: 
Hackett Publishing.
Aupperle Robin, L., and Paulus Martin, P . (2010). Neural systems underlying approach 
and avoidance in anxiety disorders. Dialogues Clin. Neurosci. 12, 517–531. doi: 10.31887/
DCNS.2010.12.4/raupperle
Bach, D. R., Guitart-Masip, M., Packard, P . A., Miró, J., Falip, M., Fuentemilla, L., et al. 
(2014). Human hippocampus arbitrates approach-avoidance conflict. Curr. Biol. 24, 
541–547. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2014.01.046
Baltes, P . B., and Staudinger, U. M. (2000). Wisdom: a metaheuristic (pragmatic) to 
orchestrate mind and virtue toward excellence. Am. Psychol.  55, 122–136. doi: 
10.1037/0003-066X.55.1.122
Bandura, A. (1977). Self-efficacy: toward a unifying theory of behavioral change. 
Psychol. Rev. 84, 191–215. doi: 10.1037/0033-295X.84.2.191
Bandura, A. (1982). Self-efficacy mechanism in human agency. Am. Psychol. 37, 
122–147. doi: 10.1037/0003-066X.37.2.122
Bazargan, L. (2024). An Iranian tribute to navalny’s courageous voice. Iran 
International. Available at: https://www.iranintl.com/en/202402208241 (Accessed 
March 14, 2024).
Ben-Ghiat, R. (2021). Strongmen: Mussolini to the present. W . W . Norton.
Bluck, S., and Glück, J. (2005). “From the inside out: People’s implicit theories of 
wisdom” in Handbook of wisdom: Psychological perspectives. eds. R. J. Sternberg and J. 
Jordan (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press)
Bredemeier, B. J., and Shields, D. L. (2006). Moral growth: a review and research 
agenda. Sport Educ. Soc. 147, 7–18. doi: 10.1080/00221325.1986.9914475
Brown, M. E., and Treviño, L. K. (2014). Do role models matter? An investigation of 
role modeling as an antecedent of perceived ethical leadership. J. Bus. Ethics  122, 
587–598. doi: 10.1007/s10551-013-1769-0
Cavanagh, G. F ., and Moberg, D. J. (1999). The virtue of courage within the 
organization. Res. Ethic. Issues Organ. 1, 1–25.
Chappell, B. (2024,). Navalny’s legacy: his ceaseless crusade against Putin and 
corruption. NPR. Available at: https://www.npr.org/2024/02/16/1231980139/alexei-
navalny-who-was-he
Chowkase, A. A. (2022). Three C’s conception of giftedness: a call for paradigm shift. 
Gift. Educ. Int. 38, 404–411. doi: 10.1177/02614294211064703
Chowkase, A. A. (2023). Social and emotional learning for the greater good: 
expanding the circle of human concern. Soc. Emot. Learn. Res. Pract. Pol. 1:100003. doi: 
10.1016/j.sel.2023.100003
Chowkase, A. A., and Watve, S. (2022). “From I to we: the three C’s conception of 
gifted education” in The Palgrave handbook of transformational giftedness for education. 
eds. R. J. Sternberg, D. Ambrose and S. Karami (Palgrave-Macmillan)
Comte-Sponville, A. (2002). A small treatise on the great virtues: The uses of philosophy 
in everyday life. New Y ork City, NY: Metropolitan Books.
Confucius (1992). The essential Confucius  (T. Cleary, Trans.). New Y ork, NY: 
Harper Collins.
Corr, P . J. (2013). Approach and avoidance behaviour: multiple systems and their 
interactions. Emot. Rev. 5, 285–290. doi: 10.1177/1754073913477507
Dollard, J., and Miller, N. E. (1950). Personality and psychotherapy; an analysis in terms 
of learning, thinking, and culture. New Y ork: McGraw-Hill.
Eccles, J. S., and Wigfield, A. (2002). Motivational beliefs, values, and goals. Annu. Rev. 
Psychol. 53, 109–132. doi: 10.1146/annurev.psych.53.100901.135153
Epictetus (1983). The handbook of Epictetus (N. White, Trans.).  Indianapolis, IN: Hackett 
Publishing Company.
Fassihi, F ., and Engelbrecht, C. (2023). Three more executed in Iran over protests. The 
New Y ork Times. Available at: https://www.nytimes.com/article/iran-protests-death-
sentences-executions.html
Finfgeld, D. L. (1999). Courage as a process of pushing beyond the struggle. Qual. 
Health Res. 9, 803–814. doi: 10.1177/104973299129122298
Foster, J. D., Shenesey, J. W ., and Goff, J. S. (2009). Why do narcissists take more risks? 
Testing the roles of perceived risks and benefits of risky behaviors. Personal. Individ. 
Differ. 47, 885–889. doi: 10.1016/j.paid.2009.07.008
France 24. (2022). The bold tactics that have kept Iran protests going. Available at: 
https://www.france24.com/en/live-news/20221020-the-bold-tactics-that-have-kept-
iran-protests-going
Glück, J., and Bluck, S. (2013). “The MORE life experience model: a theory of the 
development of personal wisdom” in The scientific study of personal wisdom. eds. M. 
Ferrari and N. Weststrate (Dordrecht, Zuid-Holland Netherlands: Springer Netherlands)
Grossman, I. (2017). Wisdom and how to cultivate it. Eur. Psychol. 22, 233–246. doi: 
10.1027/1016-9040/a000302
Hannah, S. T., Sweeney, P . J., and Lester, P . B. (2007). Toward a courageous mindset: 
the subjective act and experience of courage. J. Posit. Psychol.  2, 129–135. doi: 
10.1080/17439760701228854
Harris, H. (2001). Content analysis of secondary data: a study of courage in managerial 
decision making. J. Bus. Ethics 34, 191–208. doi: 10.1023/A:1012534014727
Hofstede, G. (2011). Dimensionalizing cultures: the Hofstede model in context. Read. 
Psychol. Cult. 2. doi: 10.9707/2307-0919.1014
Hook, K. (2022). Why Russia’s war in Ukraine is a genocide. Foreign Aff. Available at: 
https://www.foreignaffairs.com/ukraine/why-russias-war-ukraine-genocide
Hopkins, V . (2024). Thousands turn out for Navalny’s funeral in Moscow. New Y ork 
Times. Available at: https://www.nytimes.com/2024/03/01/world/europe/aleksei-
navalny-funeral-moscow-russia.html
Howard, M. C., and Alipour, K. K. (2014). Does the courage measure really measure 
courage? A theoretical and empirical evaluation. J. Posit. Psychol.  9, 449–459. doi: 
10.1080/17439760.2014.910828
Howard, M. C., and Cogswell, J. E. (2019). The left side of courage: three exploratory 
studies on the antecedents of social courage. J. Posit. Psychol.  14, 324–340. doi: 
10.1080/17439760.2018.1426780
Howard, M. C., Farr, J. L., Grandey, A. A., and Gutworth, M. B. (2017). The creation 
of the workplace social courage scale (WSCS): an investigation of internal consistency, 
psychometric properties, validity, and utility. J. Bus. Psychol. 32, 673–690. doi: 10.1007/
s10869-016-9463-8
Ito, R., and Lee, A. C. (2016). The role of the hippocampus in approach-avoidance 
conflict decision-making: evidence from rodent and human studies. Behav. Brain Res. 
313, 345–357. doi: 10.1016/j.bbr.2016.07.039
Jacobson, D. (2005). Seeing by feeling: virtues, skills, and moral perception. Ethic. 
Theory Mor. Pract. 8, 387–409. doi: 10.1007/s10677-005-8837-1
Kahneman, D. (2011). Thinking, fast and slow. New Y ork, NY: Macmillan.
Karami, S., Ghahremani, M., Parra-Martinez, F . A., and Gentry, M. (2020). A 
polyhedron model of wisdom: a systematic review of the wisdom studies in psychology, 
management and leadership, and education. Roeper Rev.  42, 241–257. doi: 
10.1080/02783193.2020.1815263
Karimi, N., and Gambrell, G. (2023). A year ago, an Iranian woman’s death sparked 
hijab protests. Now businesses are a new battleground. AP . Available at: https://apnews.
com/article/iran-hijab-protests-amini-anniversary-women-074977c6e3712b7c61acbe3
7e6f561a1
Kilmann, R. H., O’Hara, L. A., and Strauss, J. P . (2013). “Developing and validating a 
quantitative measure of organizational courage” in Voice and whistleblowing in 
organizations. eds. R. J. Burke and C. L. Cooper (Northampton, MA: Edward 
Elgar Publishing)
Koerner, M. M. (2014). Courage as identity work: accounts of workplace courage. 
Acad. Manag. J. 57, 63–93. doi: 10.5465/amj.2010.0641
Lapsley, D., and Carlo, G. (2014). Moral development at the crossroads: new trends 
and possible futures. Dev. Psychol. 50, 1–7. doi: 10.1037/a0035225
Lewin, K. (1931). The conflict between Aristotelian and Galileian modes of thought 
in contemporary psychology. J. Gen. Psychol.  5, 141–177. doi: 
10.1080/00221309.1931.9918387
Llanes, L. M., Veláquez, M., and Vélez, M. A. (2022). Land restitution and selective 
violence: evidence from Colombia. Documento CEDE, 16.
Lopez, S. J., Rasmussen, H. N., Skorupski, W . P ., Koetting, K., Petersen, S. E., and 
Y ang, Y .-T. (2010). “Folk conceptualizations of courage” in The psychology of courage: 
Modern research on an ancient virtue. eds. C. L. S. Pury and S. J. Lopez (Washington, 
DC: American Psychological Association)
Luo, Z. L., and Umar, H. (2022). Zan, zendegi, azadi — Iran protests as the world 
watches. The Gazelle. https://www.thegazelle.org/issue/230/news/iran-protests-hijab
MacIntyre, A. (1981). The nature of the virtues. Hastings Cent. Rep. 11, 27–34. doi: 
10.2307/3561072
May, D. R., Luth, M. T., and Schwoerer, C. E. (2014). The influence of business ethics 
education on moral efficacy, moral meaningfulness, and moral courage: a quasi-
experimental study. J. Bus. Ethics 124, 67–80. doi: 10.1007/s10551-013-1860-6
McNaughton, N., and Gray, J. A. (2000). Anxiolytic action on the behavioural 
inhibition system implies multiple types of arousal contribute to anxiety. J. Affect. Disord. 
61, 161–176. doi: 10.1016/S0165-0327(00)00344-X
Chowkase et al. 10.3389/fpsyg.2024.1376195
Frontiers in Psychology 13 frontiersin.org
Miller, N. E. (1944). “Experimental studies of conflict” in Personality and the behavior 
disorders. ed. J. M. Hunt (New Y ork: Ronald Press Company Oxford), 431–465.
Moore, S., and Gullone, E. (1996). Predicting adolescent risk behavior using a 
personalized cost-benefit analysis. J. Youth Adolesc.  25, 343–359. doi: 10.1007/
BF01537389
Mounk, Y . (2018). The people vs. democracy: Why our freedom is in danger and how 
we can save it. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Muris, P . (2009). Fear and courage in children: two sides of the same coin? J. Child 
Fam. Stud. 18, 486–490. doi: 10.1007/s10826-009-9271-0
O'Neil, E. B., Newsome, R. N., Li, I. H., Thavabalasingam, S., Ito, R., and Lee, A. C. 
(2015). Examining the role of the human hippocampus in approach-avoidance decision 
making using a novel conflict paradigm and multivariate functional magnetic resonance 
imaging. J. Neurosci. 35, 15039–15049. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1915-15.2015
Park, N., Peterson, C., and Seligman, M. E. P . (2004). Strengths of character and well-
being. J. Soc. Clin. Psychol. 23, 603–619. doi: 10.1521/jscp.23.5.603.50748
Peterson, C., and Seligman, M. E. P . (2004). Character strengths and virtues: A 
handbook and classification. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Plato (1987). The roots of political philosophy: Ten forgotten Socratic dialogues. Ithaca: 
Cornell University Press.
Prem, M., Rivera, A. F ., Romero, D. A., and Vargas, J. F . (2018). Killing social leaders 
for territorial control: the unintended consequences of peace. Universidad del Rosario. 
Available at: https://repository.urosario.edu.co/handle/10336/18133
Pury, C. L., and Kowalski, R. M. (2007). Human strengths, courageous actions, and 
general and personal courage. J. Posit. Psychol.  2, 120–128. doi: 
10.1080/17439760701228813
Pury, C. L. S., Kowalski, R. M., and Spearman, J. (2007). Distinctions between general 
and personal courage. J. Posit. Psychol. 2, 99–114. doi: 10.1080/17439760701237962
Pury, C. L. S., and Lopez, S. J. (2010). The psychology of courage: modern research on 
an ancient virtue. American Psychological Association.
Pury, C. L. S., and Saylors, S. (2017). “Courage, courageous acts, and positive 
psychology” in Positive psychology: Established and emerging issues. ed. D. S. Dunn (New 
Y ork, NY: Routledge)
Pury, C. L. S., and Starkey, C. B. (2010). “Is courage an accolade or a process? A 
fundamental question for courage research” in The psychology of courage: Modern 
research on an ancient virtue . eds. C. L. S. Pury and S. J. Lopez (Washington, DC: 
American Psychological Association)
Pury, C. L., Starkey, C. B., and Olson, L. R. (2024). Value of goal predicts accolade 
courage: more evidence that courage is taking a worthwhile risk. J. Posit. Psychol. 19, 
236–242. doi: 10.1080/17439760.2023.2178959
Putman, D. (2010). “Philosophical roots of the concept of courage” in The psychology 
of courage: modern research on an ancient virtue . eds. C. L. S. Pury and S. J. Lopez 
(Washington, DC: American Psychological Association)
Quartz, S. R. (2009). Reason, emotion, and decision-making: risk and reward 
computation with feeling. Trends Cogn. Sci. 13, 209–215. doi: 10.1016/j.tics.2009.02.003
Quinn, R. W ., and Worline, M. C. (2008). Enabling courageous collective action: 
conversations from united airlines flight 93. Organ. Sci. 19, 497–516. doi: 10.1287/
orsc.1070.0331
Rachman, S. J. (2004). Fear and courage: a psychological perspective. Soc. Res. 71, 
149–176. doi: 10.1353/sor.2004.0060
Rajvanshi, A. (2022). What to know about protesters facing execution in Iran. Time. 
Available at: https://time.com/6234737/iran-protesters-sentences-death-penalty
Rate, C. R. (2010). “Defining the features of courage” in The psychology of courage: 
Modern research on an ancient virtue. eds. C. L. S. Pury and S. J. Lopez (Washington, 
DC: American Psychological Association)
Rate, C. R., Clarke, J. A., Lindsay, D. R., and Sternberg, R. J. (2007). Implicit theories 
of courage. J. Posit. Psychol. 2, 80–98. doi: 10.1080/17439760701228755
Rate, C. R., and Sternberg, R. J. (2007). “When good people do nothing: a failure of 
courage” in Research companion to the dysfunctional workplace: Management challenges 
and symptoms. eds. J. Langan-Fox, C. L. Cooper and R. J. Klimoski (Northampton, MA: 
Edward Elgar Publishing Ltd)
Reuters. (2022a). Iran protests over young woman's death continue, human-rights 
group says at least 83 people killed. Available at: https://www.reuters.com/world/middle-
east/iran-protests-over-young-womans-death-continue-83-said-killed-2022-09-29/
Reuters. (2022b). Iran university students strike, piling pressure on rulers. Available 
at: https://www.reuters.com/world/middle-east/iran-university-students-strike-piling-
pressure-rulers-2022-11-01/
Rolls, E. T., and Grabenhorst, F . (2008). The orbitofrontal cortex and beyond: from 
affect to decision-making. Prog. Neurobiol.  86, 216–244. doi: 10.1016/j.
pneurobio.2008.09.001
Roosevelt, F . D. (1932). “Only thing we have to fear is fear itself ”: FDR’s first inaugural 
address. History Matters: The U.S. Survey Course on the Web. Available at: http://
historymatters.gmu.edu/d/5057/
Sartre, J. P . (1967). Essays in existentialism. New Y ork, NY: Citadel Press.
Schilpzand, P ., Hekman, D. R., and Mitchell, T. R. (2015). An inductively generated 
typology and process model of workplace courage. Organ. Sci. 26, 52–77. doi: 10.1287/
orsc.2014.0928
Schwartz, S. H., Cieciuch, J., Vecchione, M., Davidov, E., Fischer, R., Beierlein, C., et al. 
(2012). Refining the theory of basic individual values. J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 103, 663–688. 
doi: 10.1037/a0029393
Sekerka, L. E., and Bagozzi, R. P . (2007). Moral courage in the workplace: moving to 
and from the desire and decision to act. Bus. Ethic. Euro. Rev. 16, 132–149. doi: 10.1111/j.
1467-8608.2007.00484.x
Shelp, E. E. (1984). Courage: a neglected virtue in the patient–physician relationship. 
Soc. Sci. Med. 18, 351–360. doi: 10.1016/0277-9536(84)90125-4
Silke, A. (2004). Courage in dark places: reflections on terrorist psychology. Soc. Res. 
Int. Quar. 71, 177–198. doi: 10.1353/sor.2004.0072
Sternberg, R. J. (1998). A balance theory of wisdom. Rev. Gen. Psychol. 2, 347–365. 
doi: 10.1037/1089-2680.2.4.347
Sternberg, R. J. (2018). A triangular theory of creativity. Psychol. Aesthet. Creat. Arts 
12, 50–67. doi: 10.1037/aca0000095
Sternberg, R. J. (2019). “Why people often prefer wise guys to guys who are wise: an 
augmented balance theory of the production and reception of wisdom” in The 
Cambridge handbook of wisdom. eds. R. J. Sternberg and J. Glück (Cambridge, United 
Kingdom: Cambridge University Press)
Sternberg, R. J. (2022a). Giftedness as trait vs. state. Roeper Rev. 44, 135–143. doi: 
10.1080/02783193.2022.2071365
Sternberg, R. J. (2022b). The most important gift of all? The gift of courage. Roeper 
Rev. 44, 73–81. doi: 10.1080/02783193.2022.2043501
Sternberg, R. J. (2024). What is wisdom? Sketch of a TOP (tree of philosophy) theory. 
Rev. Gen. Psychol. 28, 47–66. doi: 10.1177/10892680231215433
Sternberg, R. J., and Glück, J. (2021). Wisdom: The psychology of wise thoughts, words, 
and deeds. New Y ork: Cambridge University Press.
Sternberg, R. J., Tromp, C., and Karami, S. (2023). “Intelligence, creativity, and wisdom 
are situated in the interaction among person x task x situation” in Intelligence, creativity, 
and wisdom: Exploring their connections and distinctions . eds. R. J. Sternberg, J. C. 
Kaufman and S. Karami (Palgrave-Macmillan)
Walk, R. D. (1956). Self-ratings of fear in a fear-invoking situation. J. Abnorm. Soc. 
Psychol. 52, 171–178. doi: 10.1037/h0042978
Walton, D. N. (1986). Courage: a philosophical investigation. Berkeley: University of 
California Press.
Woodard, C. R. (2004). Hardiness and the concept of courage. Consult. Psychol. J. 
Pract. Res. 56, 173–185. doi: 10.1037/1065-9293.56.3.0
Woodard, C. R., and Pury, C. L. S. (2007). The construct of courage: categorization 
and measurement. Consult. Psychol. J. Pract. Res.  59, 135–147. doi: 
10.1037/1065-9293.59.2.135
Worline, M. C. (2004). Dancing the cliff edge: The place of courage in social life.  
[Unpublished doctoral dissertation]. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan.
Worline, M. C. (2012). “Courage in organizations: an integrative review of the ‘difficult 
virtue’” in The Oxford handbook of positive organizational scholarship. eds. K. S. Cameron 
and G. M. Spreitzer (Oxford, NY: Oxford University Press)
Zhang, L., Zhang, C., and Shang, L. (2016). Sensation-seeking and domain-
specific risk-taking behavior among adolescents: risk perceptions and expected 
benefits as mediators. Personal. Individ. Differ.  101, 299–305. doi: 10.1016/j.
paid.2016.06.002
Ziblatt, S., and Levitsky, D. (2018). How democracies die. New Y ork, NY: Crown.